## Profilers

Profilers are programs specialized in *measuring*, *sampling*, *hooking-into*, *proxying* or *inspecting* another program or parts of a program.

!!! note
    To measure a programs performance characteristics beyond simple runtime statistics we need to employ special measurement programs called "profilers". A profiler will usually talk to or hook into a language's runtime to extract some information about the execution.

Different methods, different limitations, different up-sides. **function** profilers, **line** profilers, **memory** profilers, **leak detectors**, ...

!!! todo
    more info about different profilers? `memray`?

!!! note
    Types of profilers.

    Some profilers only measure function performance, which employs less overhead and is often good enough. Some others can insert instructions between each line in your program and measure more detailed information.


**Profiler Overhead**
:::center
| Profiler            | Norm. Exec. Time |
|---------------------|-------------------|
| pprofile_stat       | 1x                |
| py_spy              | 1x                |
| scalene             | 1.2x              |
| pyinstrument        | 1.5x              |
| cProfile            | 2.1x              |
| yappi_wallclock     | 3x                |
| yappi_cpu           | 5.2x              |
| line_profiler       | 6.6x              |
| Profile             | 16.1x             |
| pprofile_det        | 39.5x             |
:::


*Benchmarks taken from "Scalene: a high-performance, high-precision CPU+GPU+memory profiler for Python (PyCon US 2021)"*

!!! note
    Profiler overhead. 

    **Keep in mind** that all of these techniques can incurr *significant* overhead, the worst of which come from memory profilers.


A relatively novel approach is the "sampling profiler" which asks the runtime many times during a programs runtime about what is currently being executed. Its "stochastically" measuring so to say. 

I think. "scalene" is one of these profilers.

!!! todo
    ... more links


---

- Youtube: [Scalene: A ... profiler for python](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5iEf-_7mM1k)

!!! links 