## Profilers

Profilers are programs specialized in *measuring*, *sampling*, *hooking-into*, *proxying* or *inspecting* another program or parts of a program.

!!! note
    To measure a programs performance characteristics beyond simple runtime statistics we need to employ special measurement programs called "profilers". A profiler will usually talk to or hook into a language's runtime to extract some information about the execution.

Different methods, different limitations, different up-sides. **function** profilers, **line** profilers, **memory** profilers/**leak detectors** ...

!!! note
    Types of profilers.

    Some profilers only measure function performance, which employs less overhead and is often good enough. Some others can insert instructions between each line in your program and measure more detailed information.


**Timing Profiler Overhead**
:::center
| Profiler            | Norm. Exec. Time |
|---------------------|-------------------|
| pprofile_stat       | 1x                |
| py_spy              | 1x                |
| scalene             | 1.2x              |
| pyinstrument        | 1.5x              |
| cProfile            | 2.1x              |
| yappi_wallclock     | 3x                |
| yappi_cpu           | 5.2x              |
| line_profiler       | 6.6x              |
| Profile             | 16.1x             |
| pprofile_det        | 39.5x             |
:::


*Benchmarks taken from a talk about "scalene".*

Different techniques incurr different overhead.

!!! note
    Profiler overhead. 

    **Keep in mind** that all of these techniques can incurr *significant* overhead, the worst of which come from memory profilers.

    A relatively novel approach is the "sampling profiler" which asks the runtime many times during a programs runtime about what is currently being executed. Its "stochastically" measuring so to say. 

### Python `perf` support

> Since Python 3.12, the interpreter can run in a special mode that allows Python functions to appear in the output of the perf profiler.

!!! note
    "perf" has a wide ecosystem of available analysis tools like "hotspot"

Unfortunately **built-in support is spotty** and you might have to compile python yourself...

!!! note
    I didn't think it made sense to go into this if it is hard to set up.

    Hence: `cProfile`. It has reasonable overhead and is easy to set up. 

### `cProfile` Pytest Fixture

```python
@pytest.fixture(scope="function")
def profiled(request):
    testname = request.node.name
    pr = cProfile.Profile()

    @contextmanager
    def profiled():
        pr.enable()
        yield
        pr.disable()

    yield profiled
    ps = pstats.Stats(pr)
    Path(".profiles").mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
    ps.dump_stats(f".profiles/{testname}.prof")
```

This fixture allows us to benchmark specific spots in a test.

!!! - 

```python
def test(profiled):
    # setup() ...
    with profiled():
        complex_procedure()
    # teardown() ...
```

!!! note
    You can obviously adjust this to you needs.
    
    I always added the `.profiles/` directory to the `.gitignore`. 

When can then visualize the output of the fixture with `snakeviz`.

```bash
snakeviz .profiles/
```

!!! -

or as dot-graphs:

```bash
# If thy OS canst not find "dot", 
# thou must execute "sudo apt install graphviz".

for filename in .profiles/*.prof; do
    gprof2dot -f pstats $filename | dot -Tpng -o $filename.png
done
```

---
- Python Docs: [The Python Profilers](https://docs.python.org/3/library/profile.html)
- Github: [bloomberg/memray](https://github.com/bloomberg/memray)
- Youtube: [Scalene: A ... profiler for python](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5iEf-_7mM1k)
- Python Docs: [Python support for the Linux perf profiler](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/perf_profiling.html)
- Github: [KDAB/hotspot](https://github.com/KDAB/hotspot)
- Github: [jiffyclub/snakeviz](https://github.com/jiffyclub/snakeviz)
- Github: [jrfonseca/gprof2dot](https://github.com/jrfonseca/gprof2dot)


!!! links 